I read a book recently that really excited my brain.  Have you read Colin Milburn's _Nanovision_?  I found it off a college reading list from my alma mater while seeking healing for a recent bout of TV addiction.  I had just started watching 30 Rock from season one. Again. Yadadamean?

I liked the book so much I wanted to write about it.  Thus, the following extended education book report on a cultural critical text about the transformative science of nanotechnology.  Not really a review or an analysis. Read: writing on pinot noir.  There will be glances at parts of the book that made me want to reread all of Delueze and become a cyborg with tits.  Things like:

**The science (real) and science-fiction (imaginary) of nanotech are equally powerful co-revolutionaries - though often at odds.**

**Yet, their productions and performance together liberate us from life, death, space, and time.  Milburn does get kinda profound.**

**What's more, science/SciFi method and inquisition effect identity crisis of the best kind; the creation of cyborgs, "terminal identity," and postbiological life.  Those of us who have been driving the information superhighway - or a car - for a while may relate.**

**Yet, there's a sad experience experience for us (scientists, filmmakers, politicians, etc...) when we meet nanotech.  Some seriously crazy possibilities and liberations are captured and held hostage through classic defense mechanisms: colonization of the atomic land to fight xenomorphosis; reifying dangers and doomsday outcomes (the enemy combatant) as female/woman/vagina in order to trump up support against a credible threat to male supremacy.  Various tactics to resist a healthy merger between the macro and micro, man and machine, something beyond Logos and classic teleologies of Man's manifest destiny - which, as Milburn suggests throughout, may just be to stick a dick everywhere.  Rather than fall in love!**  

Milburn's eye levels on nanotechnology and the attendant cultural productions and discourse of scientists and science fiction auteurs alike.  He anoints this scienc-y cultural space/surface/cyberspace as a visual field called *Nanovision*.  Anointed thus because the discourse of nanotechnology has drastically changed the way we "see" the world.  "It is a way of seeing space beyond the closure of an ocular centric regime that Gilles Delueze has called "haptic vision"...when sight discovers in itself a specific function of touch that is uniquely its own, distinct from its optical function." (85)  The scientific discoveries themselves proceed from a tech that literally allows a new sight and insight.  And Milburn deploys all your faves to help him make sense of the way that _Nanovision_ is doing that, and its cultural implications: 

**Derrida and his simulacra.**
**Lacan's sex stuff and real.**
**Zizek's sublime.**
**Kristeva's abjection.**
**And my personal fave Deleuze and his body without organs.**  

The book is for scientists, cultural critics, theorists, feminists alike.  Or, if you're like me, someone that drifts along the surface tension of these environs at different access points.  In some ways it is an ultimate deconstruction project, considering the subject is science at the level where all matter and all that matters can possibly be rearranged.  Regardless, because there's enough pinot involved, we're doing this and I hope you'll like it and maybe the read the book and talk about it with me later [@internetross](http://twitter.com/internetross).

## The power of visions

Nanotech's inception is often attributed to a visionary lecture Richard Feynman gave at Caltech in 1959 called *There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom*.  But Milburn is quick to point out that Feynman's speech uses language directly from Heinlein.  We're already lost.  So science truly is a dialectic tango between the real and fantasy.  It makes sense to me, because any scientific discovery must proceed from some initial imagined result.  

What's important for Milburn and his book - and us all, perhaps - is to steer the spotlight on both the science and science fiction of nanotech because both will be equally important to decipher the impact of this new invention on our world.  The possibilities (or fears) unleashed by the STM as it peers upon the atomic landscape, or the fear (or excitement, jouissance) unleashed by imagined destruction by swarms (Thor 2, Terminator 3) or by interior agents (example, example) shift us in relatively important  ways.  

I read Greg Bear's *Blood Music* shortly after *Nanovision*.  It's one of these examples of "hard" science fiction - where the science therein is *true* enough, backed or validated enough by real-life scientists with stamps of approval and so forth.  Books like these totally tango.  Milburn calls it  "semiotic drift" (44) - he's right that there *is* a kind of losing of way in this discursive space.  While you're reading the book you get into a small cluster eff cycle, feeling the weight of the science's potential realness, realizing your mind grapes are too soft and this has to be bullshit because it's too much to cope with just now.  It's Baudrillard's precession of simulacra all over again.  It's not that the science and fiction exploit each other as copies - ha, lame - but there's a continuous layering of realities, of needing each other, finding their way through each other's suggestions.  Maps on models on maps.  On stacks.  "Terminal circularity" (52) of science and fiction, of man and machine.  Ugh, yeah, science is never exact, but more like an [*Exactitude of Science*]().  We are all aware of this on some level as humans in the digital age.  

Nevertheless, I think where Milburn proceeds from this discussion is almost more fascinating.  Because in a big way, nanovision sees and maps incredible and powerful new territories, realities, presents, futures, beings, that create a break with history and teleologic imperatives.  God may even be alive, but if he is, he's totally lost control of his creation: [Nanovision] signals the opening of a way of interrelating with forms of molecular being that are not predicated on the logic of control." (107)  Or scientists who used to be gods, are no longer omnipotent: "When worlds collide, it is no longer possible for one world to look at the other from a secure distance, from a godlike vantage point (what Haraway has called the scientific 'god-trick' of seeing everything from nowhere.)"  Lets think about it.  

Nanotechnology is not the first thing to come along and problematize humanist perceptions of personhood and agency.  When I was twelve years old I would pose as a 22F (or whatever age) in AOl sex chat rooms as a game.  Just to see.  Not to mention that a screen name to begin with could be, was, a totally non-gendered, non-human signifier.  The sack of cells and water at a desk in Chicago was becoming moot with networked key punches.  Terminal identity activated!  The Internet has quickly become such a vast augmentation of human brain power and ability that virtual skill is for many contemporary functions more critical.  Of course, and we've handed off so much of our social responsibility to the algorithim (Facebook) too.

But nanotech definitely takes it a step further - a small step into a small world that is just far enough to take us too far.  Even its cyborg logic is superior than the prosthetics - cars, limbs, iPhones - of the recent technological past.  "It's construction of bodies and machines are mutually constitutive." (51)  Not an implication or performance of queerness, "sex and sexuality made infinitely malleable, sexual difference slipping into sexual indeterminacy or deferral" (53).   (Gender non-conformist cis-boy boss tycoon, ya feel me?)  It's hard for us to even escape the metonym of talking about our cells as little machines. Etc...   

This isn't simply extending our contract with technology; distinctions are gone.  Now we'll have integration (rather than separation) anxiety.  Tony Stark won't be able to leave the suit - and why would he want to?  

Cyborgs imply a body a priori.  We're talking about manipulation at the ground floor and possible recombinations that could render a human something else entirely from the inside out.  What Milburn refers to as postbiological or posthuman.  In popular fiction, at the scary end, we get violent swarms and goo.  At the happy end - as in Greg Bear's *Blood Music* -  we get enlightened communal xenomorphosis.  But either side of the coin we're facing a transformation starting in the proteins.  Your whole body is fake boobs.  

Making a claim to a human corpus and materiality seems no longer...so simple.  You might be saying, "Well yeah, if nanotech actually succeeds."  But you know it's going to succeed!  The tango is sweaty, man.  Because even the "failure of disciplinary cohesion so far has certainly not diminished the sense that as a scientific field--perhaps unified in name only, but still a field--nanotechnology has *arrived*." (33)    And that's part of a more startling point!  Milburn's startling point.  Equipped with nanovision, whose planes and lines have been sharpening focus since 1959, we are already incorporated in a permanent imperative void of telos.

## Shock section. Liberation section

I think we can all relate to a kind of wave of future-forward imperative in which contemporary tech sweeps us up.  Our expectation of advancement never dwindles now. We are all aware of Moore's law, if only subconsciously as observers of the shrinking cost and increased power of consumer electronics on the Best Buy shelves.

But Milburn says that we have actually breached this asymptotic ascendance and are enduring an epistemic shock.  Nanovision's prosthetic gaze actually looks beyond the "proximal limit of a future that cannot be known" (9), as its haptic gaze touches atoms or literary imaginary explores post-human conscious.  Like, we can't even really guess at the future but we are absolutely sure it's going to look weird and awesome.  

In essence, we presently move into a kind of infinity - a singularity or black hole - as the possibility of infinite combinations at the atomic level release infinite possibilities, "phases" of life, users, bodies without organs to dream about and begin to live through imagination or in virtuality.  Baudrillard: "It would seem then that there will be no end because we are already in excess of ends." (79) And so the future and present is somehow collapsed in a pregnant vacuum of  branching multiplicities rather than a weave of one dialectic figure eight.  "We can really do things we can't imagine right now." (79)  Like the a tango inside the tango sweat. Makes me daydream of managing multiple offline identities.  What IRL offscreen-name will you choose today?

Right, so maybe it's not too hard to drift there philosophically with Milburn.  I mean, I also felt what I think is a similar sense of ennui when watching the Matrix trilogy and finding it hard to relate to the human right to simply exist because human life is...the original model format for life?  Actually, if we're honest with ourselves that trilogy was simply about the white man reclaiming his supremacy again - as overlord hacker Jesus benevolent God whatever.  

So who are we now, then?  Have we become/becoming something else? And how do we react to that transformation?  More pinot and then...




---------------------------------------------------------------
Believers in nanotech, the scientists and sci-fi auteurs, espouse predictions, scenarios, and imaginations that nanotech will be a part of future human life.  But the A future, rather THE future, is inevitable.  Actually already _is_ inevitable.  Made inevitable because in our technologic era of constant change we are caught in an unstoppable momentum of progress, an accelerating march of advancement.  We are always living a future in the present.  Milburn actually discusses this at length, somewhat pinning the whole book from the start on the cognitive and temporal unwraveling that nanotech creates, that nano vision envisions.  

Exposure to nanotech, nanovision goggles on everyone, has caused us to breach a sacred, perhaps humanist, boundary with history and ontological reasonings.  Milburn calls it a "cognitive shock, an "epistemic virus."  We've crashed, slipped through a [Moore-ish](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore's_law) asymptote entirely - we've broken through what Milburn calls the Singularity.  The present is already cast away, or collapsed into the future.  On some level I think we can all relate to this concept.  Technological advances, whether the self-driving car or organ printing, require considering a present position to a WTF future at all times, a "proximal limit of a future that cannot be known," as Milburn says.  He has us consider Apple's ad for the Nano.  Remember the Nano?  ["Impossibly small"](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7C0sVGIMSYw).  Fucking Jobs I love your wordplay.

  Loop my gender questions 

The line between bio and tech continues to flee.  Is deterritorialized.  At the very least, problematized in some way that you can't deny is interesting, right?  I'd say we are all transforming rapidly - our generation and next.  Because of fire, the cotton gin, and computers.  I mean it's not a simple blurring or dissolving of the difference because we now have an inescapable interdependence with tech.  We are in an explosive continuum of multitude that I think is a beautiful, hard love. Gosh, wearable tech and [cochlear implants](http://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/mar/28/deaf-40-year-old-women-hears-sound-first-time-video), [hamburgers grown in labs](http://www.popsci.com/technology/article/2013-08/first-lab-grown-hamburger-served),  gives us no doubt about a disruption to our classical biological lives and personhoods - literally environments where person might dwell.  We are going through a divorce, and taking on many new lovers.  What's great is that with Oculus VR we can make love to them through their eyes.  And that's no longer science fiction or in the horror room of Hollywood's basement.

## Last how man reasserts his hard-on 

----------------------------
but also a sensical version of the future. 

Milburn discusses how Richard Feynman's lecture to the American Physical Society at Caltech in 1959, _There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom_, was a genesis moment of the nanotech field.    A visionary moment, a precog event inspiring the hard science.  And thus a feedback loop began where the imagination of the possibilities (and horrors!) of nano science continued to waltz (even twerk) with the actual scientific breakthroughs and realizations of atomic-level tinkering.

I was really quite inspired by Milburn's reading of misogyny in nano discourse. Male supremacy reacts very very badly against nanotech, and responds in all sorts of ways to challenge dislocation.  Milburn definitely come across a romantic feminist.  But it's also kinda obvious how taking nanotech seriously is really taking a knowledge and relationship of our self seriously - at the deepest, or most sublime, level.

--------------------------------